---
layout: post
title: Preprint of Optical Illusions Paper
---

With the help of Dr. Yampolskiy, I put the information in the series on optical illusions together 
into an academic paper, which can be found here: 
[https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00415](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00415)

The main goal of creating the dataset is more or less complete, but as it stands it is not super
useful and could use some reorganization. 

I sent the paper to Luke Miles to see what he thought (after submitting to Arxiv, unfortunately) 
and he gave the following feedback:

Unrequested feedback on Max's paper:
+ That was actually a good read
+ The 1 footnote on Max's name is never resolved
+ First couple sentences of abstract are not relevant
+ Backwards quotes?
+ Italic author names?
+ Is confusion matrix test or train?
+ Column labels on confusion matrix?
+ For consistency, section 4.2 should be called "Generative Adversarial Network Results"
+ In section 5, clarify that the vision system of interest is the eyes of
  _predators_. Even if butterflies couldn't see, they would evolve fake eyes
  to fool bluejays. Feedback is via the killing of butterflies (by owls) who
  wear weak illusions.
+ Good choice to host the images on floydhub; I had like 8MB/S download speed.
  Maybe clarify that you can download them for free without an account, because
  floydhub may try to get them to sign up first (like on dropbox)

I didn't realize latex required specifying quote direction, so all of my quotes are backwards! How
embarrassing. I won't re-upload for cosmetic changes because that's against Arxiv's archiving
philosophy, but when I do make another version I will incorporate these changes. 
