---
layout: post
title: Capacity for Boredom
---

### Disclaimer: this is mostly missspelled ramblings are unfinished. Read at your own diescretion

Everything, when repeated enough time, becomes boring. If you listen to enough Motzart, you might
become bored of his style. No matter how creative Motzart is, he can't help but creat music in his
own style. The same is true, in a simpler sense, for TV sitcoms. After watching one or two (or none)
sitcoms, you identify (probably subconciously) the elements that make it a sitcom and sitcoms in
general become boring. Any attempt to liven things up results in either another boring sitcom, or
something which is interesting but no longer a sitcom. Teen fiction novels are another great
example. The number of these that you can read  before getting bored indicates your ability to
abstract away the noise and see the common theme behind all novels in the genre. There could be a
metric, we could call if the Boring Number, of any given theme, which indicated how many instances
of that theme a person can experience before getting bored of it. These number are subjective, of
course. My boring number for Motzart may be quite low, not because I'm intelligent enough to realize
the soul of his theme but because my lack of musical understanding keeps me from seeing any aspects
that would be available to someone more keen at hearing interesting patterns in his music. So the
Boring Number for a given them is pushed in opposite directions by two forces. A person's capacity
to recognise interesting aspects of instances of the theme will raise the boring number, because
they have more content to experience in any given instance. For example, someone who pays close
attention to movie details can watch the same movie several times without feeling bored because
they can skillfully extract much more content from the same instance. I'll call this trait 
extraction (todo think of a better term). On the other side is a
person's ability to comprehend the repetitiveness of the theme. A young person reading what I see as
another generic teen fiction novel might just not be smart enough to pick up on how repetitive the
genre is. I'll call this apparent non-awareness of repetitiveness sphixishness, after the allegory
of the sphinx wasp in Dougles Hoststaadtr's Metemagical Themas (TODO how to spell sphinx/sphix)

Both creation and consumption of any media is subject to these forces, and we can imagine extremes
of extraction ability and sphixishness. Consider giving a book of fairy tales to a few very different
people. Someone with no extraction ability at all would have trouble
reading books at all, citing their lack of content. "I just don't get it," this poor soul would cry,
"there's just ink on paper. No knights or princesses or these other fantasies you speak of." A less
absurd extremely poor extractor might read the words and sentences correctly but fail to identify a
narrative and quickly become bored of the repetivieness of word use and sentence structure.
Somewhere in between these two would be me "reading" a book in a foriegn langauge that I had no
comprehension. Even for my best efforts, I likely become bored of the flow of words and letters and
give up. If I somehow learned the language in this process, a whole world of content would open up
to me. 

Up the scale on extraction ability, you can imagine someone who understands every nuance of
literature and psychology and could spend days re-reading the same page, unraveling the secret
thoughts of the the author and the time they lived in, and guessing at alternate narratives the
author considered but never wrote down. Of course, there is only so much content actually present in
a given work of literature, so there is an upper bound on how much content can be extracted. There
is the curious case of someone who reads the novel and stops near the end and writes their own
endings. I would not consider this action to be extraction but creativity, which is closely related
but not the same thing. So the ideal extractor would be able to know everything the author ever put
into the book, even things not immidiatly related to literature, such as skill guesses of the
author's personal traits and frame of mind when the wrote the book.

Now imagine someone with very strong antisphixishness (and impossibly good extraction ability) 
reading several books in the same genre. They
would read one or two instances of fairy tale and understand the heart of the genre and not want to
read anymore because of how repetitive and predictable they are. Seeking novel stories, they would
find a new genre, maybe sci-fi. After reading a few scifi trilogies, they wouldn't be able to stand
the repetitive and predictable themes.  They read biogrophies, and despite
complete comprehension of the significance of each person's life, they can't remain interested any
more than you can at __yet another__ cliche vampire novel. They switch to high fantasy and find that
not only are the bored of the books within a genre, they've become bored of the entire class of
genres. Any attempt to create a novel genre strikes them as trite and derivitive, just as another
predictable fairy tale is of no interest to a normal person who has read hundreds. They find a few
oddball books, reading Finnegan's Wake and The Ticket That Exploded with complete comprehension but
find them too derivative, because they derive from a common source, the human brain, who's output
has become so banal and predictable to this poor god of antisphixishness. Such an entitiy would not
be amused, either, by random letters on a page. The randomness, once recognised, lets one disregard
the content entirely and the only content left is the typesetting and other physical aspects of the
book. 

An entity such as this, which can become bored of any theme on any level, would be said to
have supercuriosity, an aspect related to superintelligence but with different value alignment
problems. Where a superintelligence will discover how to maximize its goals in seemingly creative
ways until they are maximized, a supercuriosity would mercillessly explore and experiement and
understand the world around it simultaniously finding ways to understand themes of the objects
around it. It's hard to say what the ultimate fate of such an entity would be. Humans, besides our
built in rewards that stimulate physical pleasure, also pursue pleasures of the mind such as
literature. What prevents us from attaining supercuriosity? There are many things in our world which
are neither random nor completely predictable which we don't have the capacity to enjoy. There are
higher level themes which we have trouble comprehending and are thus incapable of getting bored of.
No one I know of could understand all human literature on such a high level that no book you could
bring them would be of any interest. No human is so versed in video games that they can borededly
play through any game on the first try with ease. And no human is so extremely well tempered to
music that you can't create a song that will feel new and original. 

TODO this paragraph breaks the transistion between the one above and below
The limits to human antisphixishness are our ability to remember old experiences and identify frames
we used on new ones. If you've read every single XKCD comic in a row over the course of several
months, you can probably go to somewhere in the middle and laugh at the same joke a second time
because you've forgotten the content of one instance, while not yet gotten bored of the theme "XKCD
comic". 

Creating a song, however, is an act very different from listening to one. Someone who has seen so
many shakespear plays and deriviative works might be so sick of the theme they never want to see any
again but yet has no ability to create their own Shakespear play. And writers are even more prones
to sphixishness than readers. How many times has an author released a successfull book only to
create several derivative works that reak of sphixishness? How many variations on the theme of "star
wars" can be created before not a single audience member is amused? Consider the quintessential
dadaist art piece, Fountain by (TODO insert name). The theme was "things that you want to try and
tell me aren't art go ahead I dare you." This theme is special in its introspeciveness, seemingly
contradictory because it depends on the audience to reject it as "art". These forms of expression
are no longer that interesting, so a dadaist creator today would be hard pressed to create anything
"not art" enought to count as interesting dadaist art. In fact, most attempts would be outright
derivative, which is further embarassing for an art form whose main purpose was to free the minds of
artists from strict and regular (and quite boring) forms. John Cage's music is also a theme; any
given piece of John Cage music clearly fits into a common theme and are, within the theme, quite
sphixish. The theme itself, the theme "John Cage Music" is quite antisphixish withing the larger
scale theme or meta-theme of "Music". So John Cage can be said to be a creative themesist but not a
very creative musician, because once he created his theme of music (a huge leap of creativity) his
remaining work of creating further instanes on this theme require "no more" creativity than Bach
composing another piece of music. I say "no more" in quotes because it is still surmountable
cretivity, but not special on the same level as the act of creating a novel theme. Meta-thematical
creativity is what many consider "true creativity" as opposed to deriviative creativity, but even
meta-themes have meta-meta-themes and within a meta-meta-theme, what looks like a huge
frame-breaking leap of creativity is merely another small step around in a fixed box. 

You can imagine a battle between the ultimate supercreativity and supercuriosity, the former tring
the create novel and interesting __things__ and the latter trying to tease apart the signal from the
noise and getting bored of them. There's no reason for these to even be sepereate agents, this seems
like a good framing for a human artist: an agent which creates things, reflects on how repetitive
and derivative they are, and then creates again. If such an entity was created inside of a computer,
it would be a quite an accomplishment. The recent advances in creativity driven AI are promising,
how would a creativity driven AI fair against a game-creating adversary? Could the process be used
to automatically generate increasingly fun games in a completely automated way? These are exciting
times.
