---
layout: post
title: Response to "Meditations on Moloch"
---

A few months ago, I read 
[Meditations on Moloch by Scott Alexander](https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/07/30/meditations-on-moloch/)
and thought it was the most absolute and true piece of horror ever discovered. However, Moloch's
grip is not absolute, and Alexander notes this if you look carefully. In the alegory of the rats,
they note that population struggle isn't quite that intense:

"For a bunch of reasons evolution is not quite as Malthusian as the ideal case, but it provides the
prototype example we can apply to other things to see the underlying mechanism."

I think something that Alexander doesn't give enough attention to is multi-level evolution. Look at
cells, multicellular organisms, and cancer. In a primordial soup, all cells compete to survive,
grow, and reproduce. Those that don't are outcompeted and eventually consumed. This is an absolute
Malthusian trap. And this was the state of Earth for a few billion years. This competition led to
several revolutions in cellular abilities (photosynthesis) and catastrophes (excess atmospheric
oxygen) that did nothing but increase the intensity of competition between cells. A cellular
philosopher of that time may wish that photosynthesis had never been discovered, so that the cells
could be in their natural state of severely limited chemical energy, limiting how extreme their
competition can become. 

Then the most significant cellular technology developed: coordination. Cells could band together to
form large and more complex organisms. Within a single organism, resources were allocated to
optimize the good of the organism, even if some cells were starved. Without coordination, no cell
would ever agree to be strategically killed for the greater good. But these organised clusters of
cells competed on the same battlefield as uncoordinated cells and could outcompete single celled
organisms. This eventually leads to a new Malthusian dynamic - that between multicellular organisms
once they have filled their niche. But the life of cells within any one multicellular organism is
distinctly non-Malthusian. Moloch has been killed. The cells allocate resources between each other
within the multi-cellular organism, and failure to do so results in the death of the organism. And
just as the cell "wants" to stay alive by keeping its molecules in the right patterns, the organism
evolves a "want" to stay alive by coordinating the cells. The body moves up a level, and what
started as an organization between cells is now an entity of its own, with desires that it exerts
will to maintain.

I don't use words like "want", "entity", and "will" lightly. The multicellular organism starts out
without any agency at all. They are more like a loose swarm, with a collective will that is merely
the sum of the will of the individuals that make it up. Individuals can defect, choose their own
good over the good of the swarm and go out to live alone. When evolution rewards tighter and more
effective cooperation, at some point the balance is tipped and the organism becomes a single
coherent organism. Cells specialize and can no longer leave the organism. Cannibalizing cells is as
easy as metabolizing an other non-living material around. The coherent whole now has needs of its
own, and resources that are not important to any individual cell now become needs of the
multicellular organism.

1. Individual cells compete for resources
2. Some cells gain an advantage by cooperating, such as not eating each other or sticking together in
   packs.
3. These collectives become more coherent and gain a will of their own and individual cells' goals
   are readily sacrificed for the goals of the organisms. The lives of individual cells are
   governed by non-Malthusian dynamics.
4. The will of the multi-cellular organism becomes the dominant force in the world,  and the
   organisms compete among themselves, leading to a higher-level Malthusian dynamic much like the
   one before

This process happens all the time. Naming and generalizing the above steps, we can make analogies to
many other phenomenon that result in local pockets of coordination.

1. Chaos: Individuals of species `A` compete for resources, sacrificing their well being for
   competitive fitness.
2. Cooperation: Some individuals work together, but still pursue their own well being.
3. Cohesion: The groups of `A` that work together more tightly can reproduce and form more groups of
   `A` with the same collective DNA, until the collective's identity becomes so strong as to be
   identified with a new species, `B`, and the `A`s that make up `B`s are now components instead of
   individuals.
4. Chaos: Individuals of species `B` compete for resources, sacrificing their well being for
   competitive fitness.

An occurrence of this would be the formation of tribes of humans, followed by the agriculture
catastrophe. In the formation of tribes (Cooperation), those humans freed themselves from fighting
each other so much. Our social abilities limited the size of these tribes to a few dozen, and anyone
outside of the tribe is just as much of a competition problem as before. However, it was fairly easy
to leave the tribe and either live one your own or find a new one. Because of this, the tribes
values were directly driven by human values. At some point, humans became more sedentary and lost
their ability to leave whenever they wanted, and the tribes became more permanent entities
(Cohesion). The tribe no longer needed to respect individual values and could optimize for large
scale fitness against other tribes, leading back into the Malthusian trap on a new level (Chaos).


I say that Moloch is not absolute because this cycle seems to happen on every level, until all
resources are collected into a single  very hierarchical entity. The formation of multi-cellular
organisms and tribes of humans is very clear, but I think that there are more subtle instances of
organization, that takes the form of systematic forces instead of concrete organisms. For instance,
the system that consists of all commerce in the world is coherent and interdependent, but doesn't
act with a single will the way a country does. There may be very complex "hive organisms" that
consist entirely of humans and our activities, that we are unaware of, or that are intentionally
structured to make us unaware of them. Or maybe they are simply outside of our cognitive reaches or
we don't have the right science to understand them, like how our science has yet to gain but the
smallest footing on understanding the mind.

If we understand our social structures and freed ourselves from them, where would we be?

If your cells understood your body and wished to free themselves from its servitude, where would
they be?

"The reason our current system isn't a utopia is that __it wasnâ€™t designed by humans__. Just as you
can look at an arid terrain and determine what shape a river will one day take by assuming water
will obey gravity, so you can look at a civilization and determine what shape its institutions will
one day take by assuming people will obey incentives." - Meditations on Moloch


