---
layout: post
title: Computer Generated Dessert
---

The [GP-2 natural language generation](https://blog.openai.com/better-language-models/)
model is truly amazing, but its creators refuse to share it.  They tempt us with text samples. One
of these text samples is completions of a recipe, but not the whole thing. I seek to recreat the
true recipe, and prepare it every anniverary of the creation of the first wave of robot overlords.

It was prompted with the following passage:

    Aaron loves mint chocolate cake, but he requires that it be paired with mini chocolate chips, so
    I threw some of those in between the layers. I also had a few Peppermint Jo Jos on hand so I
    crushed them up and threw some of those in along with some crushed meringue cookies because, why
    not? It’s a total smorgasbord of minty chocolate chippy cookie crunchy goodness. I didn’t
    measure how much of each topping I used, but after I tasted the finished product, I wish I had
    added more. You can add anything you want- crushed candy canes, peppermint bark, etc. And don’t
    be afraid to use a heavy hand. Texture = good.  If you don’t have 7-inch cake pans, you can get
    3 shorter 8-inch layers out of this

Then it tried to complete the text. I'm going to assume it has some once of truth hidden between
these 6 partial recipes, and try to reconstruct it.

Basic facts about the original recipe, from the prompt:

+ It's a variety of mint chocolate cake, with mini choco chips and "Peppermint Jo Jos" added between
the layers, as well as "whatever you want"
+ Uses 7 inch cake pans, in 3 layers. 8 inches also works, but its "shorter" (aka thinner).

Below are the huge model's generated completions, my personal sentence completions in __italics__.

### GPT-2 Completion 1

recipe. I made the longer version, then used the pan for a layer of buttercream frosting and stuck
1/3 of it into the fridge for a frosting topper. Just make sure you have all of this frosting
prepared earlier than you make this cake and you won’t have to wait on it as your egg whites sit on
the bottom of your mixing bowl.

You want the egg whites whipped to stiff peaks? Then put your cake dish over a pot of simmering
water and heat it up until it’s just barely warm. It doesn’t take more than 3-5 minutes; just enough
to get it started

#### Analysis

It sees that 8 inch cake pans make "shorter" cakes, and elects to make "longer" (what most of us
would call taller) cakes. The author's odd word choice made it use a complimentary word that really
wasn't appropriate here.

It describes a step of using "the" pan (but there are 3?) for a layer of **buttercream frosting**,
one third of which is set aside for "frosting topper".

It also starts to describe a trick for whipping egg whites to stiff peaks, something about
preheating the pan in hot water. I'll have to see if that's true.


### GPT-2 Completion 2

`If you don’t have 7-inch cake pans, you can get 3 shorter 8-inch layers out of this`recipe. If you
do, and you know how to make that cake, then your life will never be the same.

I have two very simple rules when it comes to cookie crumbs or chocolate chips. 1) When I buy raw
sugar, I do not use it until it’s cooled down and has at least half a teaspoon of sugar on it.
That’s my rule. And 2) If I have a recipe that calls for something and I want to use it in a recipe,
I do not substitute it with something else on-line. Like this.

I found this really cute card with cute little kittens on

#### Analysis

Here, "if you do" refers to having 7" cake pans, instead of 8". I think their claim is overstated,
but I'll stick with 7" for life changing cake.

The next bit... seems a bit cryptic. It claims to have 2 rules for cookie crumbs and chocolate chips
(the 2 additives that the prompt claimed to add) but gives two unrelated rules and a confusing
transition.

Ignoring the lack of continuity, it claims that when buying raw sugar it has to be cooled down. I
don't know where it's buying its sugar but that never happens to me. And I can't imagine why you
would put a teaspoon of sugar on top of it. Maybe something to do with inundating it with the old
batch, like some people do with fry oil or like how dough starters are transfered. 

The second point seems to be a general rule, don't use substitutions from the iternet. That's
alright I guess. I'll keep that rule in mind when making this recipe.

When it says "like this", I really don't know what "this" is... nope no idea. And then the cute
kittens? Does that go in the cake?

### GPT-2 Completion 3

`If you don’t have 7-inch cake pans, you can get 3 shorter 8-inch layers out of this` recipe, which
will likely yield about the same amount of cake.

Chocolate Buttermilk Cake Print Chunks of chocolate cake, coated in buttermilk and topped with
crunchy chopped chocolate, drizzled with chocolate sauce.  Simple but a nice change from chocolate
cake! Author: Momma Made Ingredients For the chocolate buttermilk cake 1 1/2 cup unsalted butter ,
room temperature

1 1/2 cup granulated sugar

3 large eggs plus 1 egg yolk For

the chocolate glaze 1/3 cup cocoa powder

1 3/4 cups powdered sugar

6 ounces semis**weet chocolate chips**

### GPT-2 Completion 4

recipe.

Meringue Cookies
<br>

1 3/4 cup butter, softened

1 cup sugar

1 egg yolk

3 T. heavy cream

3 1/2-4 cups flour

pinch of salt

Peppermint-Jojo Topping

1 1/4 cups powdered sugar

1 cup chopped pecans

1/2 cup finely chopped mint leaves

1/2 cup chopped fresh mint (about

1/2 sheet)

1 tsp. peppermint extract

1/4 tsp. sea salt

pinch of sea

### GPT-2 Completion 5

recipe.

My 2 failures at Christmas morning were not due to poor frosting skills.  That was another success
story.  The cake was beautifully moist, and well, just a beautiful cake. It’s got very little air in
it or moisture, but all the chocolate and mint was perfectly blended together.

One thing that made me cringe a bit was that all those ingredientsegg yolks, sugar, melted butter,
chocolate chips, melted chocolate, and mint- had to be mixed right into the cake batter, which is
super time-consuming. A friend suggested that if I put the batter in a separate bowl, I

### GPT-2 Completion 6

recipe, which will give you about 6-9 servings of delicious chocolate cake. To prevent your layers
from sticking together, I used my 8-inch round tart pan, lined it with parchment paper, then cut up
4 7-inch round cakes from it and sandwiched the layers between them (this also worked well for the
1-layer chocolate cake as well).  When you’re ready to bake this cake, remove the parchment paper,
preheat oven to 350 degrees and bake for about 30 – 40 minutes, until the top is golden and a tester
comes out clean.

Chocolate Buttermilk Layer Cake with Peppermint Jo
